INTRODUCTION
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic neurological disease which affects the central nervous system (CNS). It is characterised by destruction of the myelin sheath around the axons of neurons. MS is the most common non-traumatic cause of neurological morbidity among young adults. The age of disease onset is between 20 and 45 years. It however occasionally occurs in children and middle-aged adults. Half of MS patients require walking aide within the first 15 years of disease onset.  

MS is clinically characterised into 4 groups based on the course of the illness, which is highly variable and unpredictable. 

Relapsing-remitting MS is the commonest type. It is characterised by alternating episodes of remissions and relapses. 

Secondary progressive MS usually occurs in some with a background relapsing-remitting MS. It is characterised by continuous exacerbation of symptoms without remissions or plateaux. 

Primary progressive affects 1 in 10 MS patients and is usually drug-resistant. There is increasing exacerbation of symptoms without remissions. However there may be occasional plateaux. 

Progressive relapsing is the rarest form. There is intermittent relapses with no periods of remission. 


CLINICAL FEATURES
The earliest symptoms of MS include paraesthesia, diplopia, vertigo, ataxia and urinary incontinence. MS commonly manifests as unilateral numbness that affects one of the legs before spreading to the other and subsequently ascends to the pelvic region, trunk and thorax. 

Other clinical features include neuropathic pain, complete or partial vision loss, fatigue and sexual problems. 

DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of MS is mainly clinical as there is no singular investigation that can diagnose MS. Diagnosis can be made using one or more of the following criteria—space dissemination criteria, time dissemination criteria, and inflammatory criteria. 

The space dissemination criteria uses findings from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—at least 2 scars in the white matter of the brain, spinal cord or optic nerves. 

The time dissemination criteria stipulates that diagnosis be made when there are 2 different of symptoms lasting 24 hours or more episodes which are at least 1 month apart. 

The inflammatory criterion is based on signs of chronic CNS inflammation including oligoclonal bands determined by CSF analysis.  


EPIDEMIOLOGY
Between 250,000 and 350,000 people are affected by MS in the United States. Women are twice as likely to be affected as men. People of Northern European descent have the highest risk relative to other geographical locations. 

Although the cause of MS is unknown, genetic and non-genetic risk factors have been implicated in its aetiology. The main genetic risk for MS is associated with HLA-DRB1*15. 

Non-genetic risk factors include low serum vitamin D, smoking, low exposure to sunlight, exposure to ultraviolet B, childhood obesity and Ebstein-Barr Virus (EBV) infection. The variation of MS risk across geographical locations has been linked to lattitude and exposure to sun. The strongest and most recent evidence for the involvement of EBV in MS pathology shows that being EBV-negative is protective for MS. Molecular mimicry has been proposed as the mechanism through which EBV predisposes to MS. In addition to the environmental factors mentioned earlier, evidence from the stromg concordance in dizygotic twins suggests that MS risk begins in utero. These risks are likely conferred through post-translational and epigenetic mechanisms which have yet to be fully elucidated. 


PATHOLOGY

The hallmark of MS is perivenular inflammatory lesions and demyelinating plaques. Multiple discrete hard, rubbery, pinkish or greyish lesions are found in the white matter post-mortem. These lesions consist of macrophages and lymphocytes in regions of myelin and oligodendrocyte loss. Unlike other inflammatory processes, axons in the area of lesion are relatively well preserved. Remyelination can however be seen in all disease stages, especially in progressive disease. 

AIM
We set out to in study epigenetic factors and gene expression patterns using data from countries of varying demographics
